The Taliban have captured three regional capitals in Afghanistan as they continue to make sweeping territorial gains in the country.
They seized control of the key northern city of Kunduz on Sunday, as well as Sar-e-Pul and Taloqan.
It means five regional capitals have fallen to the militants since Friday, with Kunduz being their most important gain this year.
The city is well connected to other areas, including the capital Kabul.
Violence has escalated across Afghanistan after US and other international forces began to withdraw their troops from the country, following 20 years of military operations.
Taliban militants have made rapid advances in recent weeks. Having captured large swathes of the countryside, they are now targeting key towns and cities.
The three northern cities fell to Taliban control within hours of each other on Sunday, with one resident in Kunduz describing the situation as "total chaos".
The Afghan government, meanwhile, said its forces were fighting to retake key installations.
Heavy fighting has also been reported in Herat in the west, and in the southern cities of Kandahar and Lashkar Gah.
Thousands of civilians have been displaced this year. Families, including babies and young children, have been sheltering in a school in the north-eastern city of Asadabad.
"Many bombs were dropped on our village. The Taliban came and destroyed everything. We were helpless and had to leave our houses. Our children and ourselves are sleeping on the ground in dire conditions", Gul Naaz told AFP.
"There was firing, one of my seven-year-old daughters went out during that fighting and disappeared. I don't know if she is alive or dead," another displaced resident said.
The US has intensified its air strikes on Taliban positions, with Afghan military officials saying militants have been killed. But the Taliban say the air strikes hit two hospitals and a school in the city of Lashkar Gah. Neither claim has been independently verified.
The US embassy in Afghanistan condemned the Taliban's "violent new offensive against Afghan cities", saying the group's actions to "forcibly impose its rule are unacceptable".
"They demonstrate wanton disregard for the welfare and rights of civilians and will worsen this country's humanitarian crisis," it said in a statement.
A big change on the battlefield
By Khalil Noori, BBC News, Kabul
This attack on a number of strategic cities and their fall to the Taliban was unprecedented. But as the deadline for the full withdrawal of foreign forces approached, a big change on the battlefield was expected.
Now it is time for the Afghan government to prove that its well-equipped forces, 350,000 strong, are able to retake the lost areas.
It would be difficult for the Taliban to hold Kunduz, but for several weeks the group has kept control of commercial centres important for trade with Iran and Pakistan.
The populations in cities taken by the Taliban are paying the price of war, having lost loved ones or property. They are having to leave their homes, fearing the launch of a government operation to retake the cities.
Peace talks with the Taliban in Doha are deadlocked. If the process resumes, from now on both sides will be trying to control the larger area to justify a greater share of power, if they agree on a transitional government.
The importance of Kunduz
The seizure of Kunduz is the most significant gain for the Taliban since they launched their offensive in May. The city, home to 270,000 people, is considered a gateway to the country's mineral-rich northern provinces.
And its location makes it strategically important as there are highways connecting Kunduz to other major cities, including Kabul, and the province shares a border with Tajikistan.
That border is used for the smuggling of Afghan opium and heroin to Central Asia, which then finds its way to Europe. Controlling Kunduz means controlling one of the most important drug smuggling routes in the region.
It also holds symbolic significance for the Taliban because it was a key northern stronghold before 2001. The militants captured the city in 2015 and again in 2016 but have never been able to hold it for long.
Is Afghanistan being left 'friendless'?
By Paul Adams, BBC Diplomatic Correspondent
Former British Gen Sir Richard Barrons says there is a danger of Afghanistan feeling "friendless", in the wake of recent battlefield defeats and the possible withdrawal of diplomats and contractors from Kabul if things get worse.
It is much too early to speculate about a Saigon-style withdrawal from the capital, echoing the way the Americans hastily left Vietnam in the final act of the war there, in 1975.
But in recent days, British and American calls for their nationals to leave the country threaten to create a dangerous narrative.
It is something that western military planners have been worried about for some time, following US President Joe Biden's decision, in April, to withdraw American forces by 11 September.
In June, classified UK Ministry of Defence documents were found at a Canterbury bus stop by a member of the public. One of them voiced just this concern, speaking about the need to counter an "abandonment narrative" in Afghanistan.
"Precise language may be needed," it said, "to avoid misunderstandings about 'retrograde to zero' vs normal diplomatic (including military) representation."
"Retrograde to zero" is the peculiar euphemism used to describe the withdrawal process now in its final weeks. In other words, planners were only too aware of creating the dangerous impression that Afghanistan might indeed be left "friendless".
That is not yet the case. American air strikes are still being used in an attempt to halt the Taliban's advances. Britain and the US will doubtless have hidden assets on the ground, working feverishly to stem the tide of the war.
Who are the Taliban?
The Taliban were removed from power in Afghanistan by US-led forces in 2001, but the group has gradually regained strength since and is seizing territory again.
As the US prepares to complete its withdrawal by 11 September, after two decades of war, the Taliban are overrunning Afghan military outposts, town and villages and surrounding major cities, fuelling fears once again that they could topple the government.
The group entered direct talks with the US back in 2018, and in February 2020 the two sides struck a peace deal in Doha that committed the US to withdrawal and the Taliban to preventing attacks on US forces. Other promises included not allowing al-Qaeda or other militants to operate in areas it controlled and proceeding with national peace talks.
But in the year that followed, the Taliban continued to target Afghan security forces and civilians. Now, as the US prepares to leave, the group is resurgent and advancing rapidly across the country.
Rise to power
The Taliban, or "students" in the Pashto language, emerged in the early 1990s in northern Pakistan following the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan. It is believed that the predominantly Pashtun movement first appeared in religious seminaries - mostly paid for by money from Saudi Arabia - which preached a hardline form of Sunni Islam.
The promise made by the Taliban - in Pashtun areas straddling Pakistan and Afghanistan - was to restore peace and security and enforce their own austere version of Sharia, or Islamic law, once in power.
From south-western Afghanistan, the Taliban quickly extended their influence. In September 1995 they captured the province of Herat, bordering Iran, and exactly one year later they captured the Afghan capital, Kabul, overthrowing the regime of President Burhanuddin Rabbani - one of the founding fathers of the Afghan mujahideen that resisted the Soviet occupation. By 1998, the Taliban were in control of almost 90% of Afghanistan.
Afghans, weary of the mujahideen's excesses and infighting after the Soviets were driven out, generally welcomed the Taliban when they first appeared on the scene. Their early popularity was largely due to their success in stamping out corruption, curbing lawlessness and making the roads and the areas under their control safe for commerce to flourish.
But the Taliban also introduced or supported punishments in line with their strict interpretation of Sharia law - such as public executions of convicted murderers and adulterers, and amputations for those found guilty of theft. Men were required to grow beards and women had to wear the all-covering burka.
The Taliban also banned television, music and cinema, and disapproved of girls aged 10 and over going to school. They were accused of various human rights and cultural abuses. One notorious example was in 2001, when the Taliban went ahead with the destruction of the famous Bamiyan Buddha statues in central Afghanistan, despite international outrage.
Pakistan has repeatedly denied that it was the architect of the Taliban enterprise, but there is little doubt that many Afghans who initially joined the movement were educated in madrassas (religious schools) in Pakistan.
Pakistan was also one of only three countries, along with Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates (UAE), which recognised the Taliban when they were in power in Afghanistan. It was also the last country to break diplomatic ties with the group.
At one point, the Taliban threatened to destabilise Pakistan from areas they controlled in the north-west. One of the most high-profile and internationally condemned of all Pakistani Taliban attacks took place in October 2012, when schoolgirl Malala Yousafzai was shot on her way home in the town of Mingora.
A major military offensive two years later following the Peshawar school massacre greatly reduced the group's influence in Pakistan though. At least three key figures of the Pakistani Taliban had been killed in US drone strikes in 2013, including the group's leader, Hakimullah Mehsud.
Al-Qaeda 'sanctuary'
The attention of the world was drawn to the Taliban in Afghanistan in the wake of the 11 September 2001 World Trade Center attacks in New York. The Taliban were accused of providing a sanctuary for the prime suspects - Osama Bin Laden and his al-Qaeda movement.
On October 7, 2001, a US-led military coalition launched attacks in Afghanistan, and by the first week of December the Taliban regime had collapsed. The group's then-leader, Mullah Mohammad Omar, and other senior figures, including Bin Laden, evaded capture despite one of the largest manhunts in the world.
Many senior Taliban leaders reportedly took refuge in the Pakistani city of Quetta, from where they guided the Taliban. But the existence of what was dubbed the "Quetta Shura" was denied by Islamabad.
Despite ever higher numbers of foreign troops, the Taliban gradually regained and then extended their influence in Afghanistan, rendering vast tracts of of the country insecure, and violence in the country returned to levels not seen since 2001.
There were numerous Taliban attacks on Kabul and, in September 2012, the group carried out a high-profile raid on Nato's Camp Bastion base.
Hopes of a negotiated peace were raised in 2013, when the Taliban announced plans to open an office in Qatar. But mistrust on all sides remained high and the violence went on.
In August 2015, the Taliban admitted they had covered up Mullah Omar's death - reportedly of health problems at a hospital in Pakistan - for more than two years. The following month, the group said it had put aside weeks of infighting and rallied around a new leader in the form of Mullah Mansour, who had been the deputy of Mullah Omar.
At around the same time, the Taliban seized control of a provincial capital for the first time since their defeat in 2001, taking control of the strategically important city of Kunduz.
Mullah Mansour was killed in a US drone strike in May 2016 and replaced by his deputy Mawlawi Hibatullah Akhundzada, who remains in control of the group.
Countdown to withdrawal
In the year following the US-Taliban peace deal of February 2020 - which was the culmination of a long spell of direct talks - the Taliban appeared to shift its tactics from complex attacks in cities and on military outposts to a wave of targeted assassinations that terrorised Afghan civilians.
The targets - journalists, judges, peace activists, women in positions of power - appeared to suggest that the Taliban had not changed their extremist ideology, only their strategy.
Despite grave concerns from Afghan officials over the government's vulnerability to the Taliban without international support, the new US president, Joe Biden, announced in April 2021 that all American forces would leave the country by 11 September - two decades to the day since the felling of the World Trade Center.
Having outlasted a superpower through two decades of war, the Taliban began seizing vast swathes of territory, threatening to once again topple a government in Kabul in the wake of a foreign power withdrawing.
The group is thought to now be stronger in numbers than at any point since they were ousted in 2001 - with up to 85,000 full time fighters, according to recent Nato estimates. Their control of territory is harder to estimate, as districts swing back and forth between them and government forces, but recent estimates put it somewhere between a third and a fifth of the country.
The advance is more rapid than many had feared. General Austin Miller, the commander of the US-led mission in Afghanistan, warned in June that the country could be on a path towards a chaotic civil war, which he called a "concern for the world".
A US intelligence assessment the same month reportedly concluded that the Afghan government could fall within six months of the American military departure.
US to evacuate thousands of Afghans before troop withdrawal
The US plans to evacuate thousands of Afghans who worked for the American military ahead of September's troop withdrawal, senior officials have said.
The plan could involve moving as many as 50,000 people - interpreters and their families - to other countries.
Afghan interpreters who have worked for the US for years fear reprisals from the Taliban after the withdrawal.
As many as 18,000 Afghans have applied for US visas, but the lengthy process has been hindered by delays.
The plan is to move them to other countries before September where their applications can be finalised in safety.
Speaking at the White House on Thursday, President Joe Biden said: "Those who helped us are not going to be left behind. They're welcome here just like anyone else who risked their lives to help us."
Mr Biden is due to hold talks with Afghan President Ashraf Ghani in Washington on Friday. They are expected to discuss the current security situation in Afghanistan, as well as the nature of US support after its military withdrawal.
Former Afghan interpreters fear death after UK exit
Republican Congressman Mike McCaul, who has advocated for the evacuation programme, told Reuters news agency that about 9,000 interpreters who had applied for Special Immigration Visas (SIVs) would be included in the plan, along with their family members.
"You are probably talking about 50,000 people. There's no way to expedite their visas in-country... on a timely basis that would save their lives," he said.
Mr McCaul said destinations that "could be on the table" include Kuwait, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain. He said the operation would involve "a lot of planes".
Pentagon spokesman John Kirby said plans for the evacuation were well under way, but that military aircraft might not be needed.
"We are taking this seriously. We know we have an obligation to these men and women and their families," he told journalists. "Planning is ongoing, lots of options are available."
Other senior US officials involved in the plan said visa processing would continue after the military withdrawal "including for those who remain in Afghanistan".
"Should it become necessary, we will consider additional relocation or evacuation options," one official quoted by AFP news agency said.
President Biden announced in April that US troops would leave by 11 September, after 20 years of military involvement in Afghanistan. "It is time to end America's longest war," Mr Biden said.
There are at least 2,500 US troops in the country as part of the 9,600-strong Nato Afghan mission.
Afghan interpreters rejected for resettlement fear death after UK exit
AJ has been scared to leave his home in Kabul for months - he fears the Taliban want him and his family dead.
Now in his early 30s, he is one of hundreds of Afghans who worked with British forces as interpreters and support staff, and who may now be targeted by the militants as a result. They fear the risk will only increase when foreign forces pull out this year.
But AJ (who cannot reveal his name for fear of being attacked) has been repeatedly rejected for resettlement under UK government schemes to help interpreters such as himself and their families resettle in the UK.
British officials say he was dismissed for smoking in his accommodation. Interpreters who were fired are not eligible for resettlement.
AJ says that he was not told that he was being dismissed when he stopped working with the army, and is incredulous at the justification for blocking his move to the UK.
"It cannot be that serious that it can cost me my life," he says. "I know that I am in real danger. I can't even take up a job. I don't go to public spaces."
Dismissals 'for HR management'
Some 1,010 interpreters - one in three - were dismissed by the British between 2001 and 2014 for "disciplinary reasons" without the right to appeal, government figures show.
But retired Colonel Simon Diggins, formerly the British attaché in Kabul and now a campaigner for Afghan interpreters, says many of those dismissals were for trivial reasons.
"Whilst some of those who were dismissed did things that were disgraceful, there were a very large number of people who were dismissed for very minor or administrative issues," he told the BBC.
"There is a suspicion that the dismissals were used for HR management. There is very little evidence for why people were dismissed. What we're asking for is that their cases are all reviewed."
The Ministry of Defence says it strongly rejects the idea dismissals were used "administratively".
'They know who I am'
AJ's fears have only grown following last week's announcement that American and British forces will leave Afghanistan by 11 September, at a time when the Taliban is growing in strength across the country.
AJ was recruited by the British when he was a teenager. Interpreting enemy messages for a parachute regiment and the Royal Marines, he took part in missions across Helmand Province in southern Afghanistan, where the Taliban had an entrenched presence. A commanding officer praised his "hard work and dedication" in a service certificate.
When his regiment faced a Taliban attack in the southern town of Sangin, AJ says he was forced to flee without his personal belongings - including his identity card. He believes the Taliban uncovered them and learnt of his work for the British.
Since he stopped working with the army, AJ says his family - he is married with three children - has received three letters containing death threats from the Taliban. "I know that they know who I am," he says. "And it's making me sick."
Over the past six years AJ has applied to the resettlement scheme several times, but has been rejected on each occasion.
After an application in December, he received an email from officials running the resettlement scheme - seen by the BBC - telling him that he was "not eligible for relocation" because he had been dismissed for "possession of prohibited items" and "smoking in your accommodation".
When he applied again this month, he was rejected on the same grounds.
Another dismissed interpreter, "Ahmad", also had an application rejected this month.
He says he was fired for arriving late to work on three occasions in 2013. Since then, Ahmad says he has been threatened by the Taliban - even a neighbour in Kabul told him he would one day be killed as "an infidel".
"I've grown a beard and changed my clothes to protect myself," Ahmad says. "Coming late shouldn't cost you your life."
'Debt of gratitude'
Since announcing a resettlement scheme in 2013, the Ministry of Defence has extended the number of those who are eligible - but this still does not include any interpreters who were dismissed "unless in exceptional circumstances".
"We owe a huge debt of gratitude to interpreters who risked their lives working alongside UK forces in Afghanistan," a spokesperson for the Ministry of Defence told the BBC.
"Nobody's life should be put at risk because they supported the UK Government to bring peace and stability. We are the only nation with a permanent expert team based in Kabul to investigate claims from courageous local staff who are threatened as a result of their work with the UK."
So far, some 1,358 interpreters have been able to relocate to the UK, from a total of 2,850 interpreters and other staff employed by the UK military.
One of them is Eddie Idrees (not his real name), a former SAS interpreter who took part in hundreds of missions including parachute jumps and a break-in to a Taliban prison - experiences he has documented in a book. Of 18 friends who worked with US and British troops only he and a friend also now in the UK survived.
All the others were either killed in action or later murdered by the Taliban.
Mr Idrees says he also fears for interpreters who have worked on military operations and remain in Afghanistan after the international pullout.
"When the British pull out of Afghanistan it will just let the Taliban target them easily," he said.
Even those who are eligible for the scheme face an application process that can last for up to 18 months, a delay that Mr Idrees says could put lives at risk.
"The day when British forces leave it is the day you will see a surge in violence. Once they leave, those areas that used to be safe, those provinces, won't be safe any more. And these interpreters are not going to be forgotten by the Taliban."
'Still waiting'
Col Diggins has called for an "emergency plan" to relocate interpreters as soon as possible.
"What really worries me is the scale and pace to get the people who deserve to come to this country given how the situation is worsening," he said. "It's taking 12 to 18 months to process paperwork. We don't have that much time."
The Ministry of Defence says it is currently looking at the cases of 84 former interpreters.
Among them is "Amir", who served for two years on the front line with British troops in Helmand where they came under regular attack from the Taliban. Since resigning in 2011, he says he has faced intimidation over his work with the British. He hasn't been able to see his family who live in Taliban-controlled territory in Logar Province, just outside Kabul.
Having been rejected twice, Amir is hopeful his third application will be successful. "I am waiting to hear good news," he said.
But he has felt "dread" since hearing the news the foreign troops would withdraw. "That is going to cause more of a problem for us. I feel a lot of risk these days. If you served as an interpreter who worked with the British you are staying at home."
The UK is not the only country working on schemes to help their former Afghan interpreters.
The US has a special visa programme for Afghans who have worked with its military. At least 89,000 individuals have been resettled through the scheme and 17,000 are still waiting for a result, according to the International Refugee Assistance Project.
Germany's defence minister has said it is her country's duty to protect Afghan staff when the German contingent leaves.
But for those who have so far not qualified for the schemes, the future is uncertain.
"I am going to try to make them trust me and see that my life is at risk," AJ said after hearing his fourth application had been rejected. "It's terrible. I'm still waiting."